docs: async transform explainer (#142)
mainmatter/sheepdog: docs/src/content/docs/explainers/async-transform.mdx

---
title: Async Transform
description: How the Async transform works
---

import { LinkCard, Tabs, TabItem, Aside, Code } from '@astrojs/starlight/components';
import BlankLink from '@components/BlankLink.astro';

This explainer is meant to show you how the `Async Transform` Vite plugin works so that you can be
confident in using it. If you want to know how to setup the Vite plugin please go to the following
link.

<LinkCard
	href="getting-started/installation/#setup-the-async-transform"
	title="Setup the Async Transform"
	description="Read the short guide about how to setup the Async Transform"
/>

## What's a Vite plugin

> For those who doesn't know anything about what a Vite plugin even is and want to know more here's a

Reviewer: When I read "you" in a doc, I am under the impression the doc talks to me rather than talking to a fictive audience. So I wouldn't use phrasing that suppose the presence of other people reading this with me.

```suggestion
If you don't know anything about what a Vite plugin even is and want to know more, here's a
```

> little explainer in the explainer. If you just want to know about what the `Async Transform` does

Reviewer: ```suggestion
little explainer in the explainer. If you just want to know about what the `Async Transform` does,
```

feel free to skip to the next paragraph.

<details>
	<summary>Explainer in the explainer</summary>

    A Vite plugin is essentially a small bit of code with a series of methods that Vite will call
    sequentially during the dev and build script.

    Every function is called in a specific moment of the build and can affect it in different ways.

>     Here's an example of a very simple Vite plugin very similar to one in <BlankLink href="https://vitejs.dev/guide/api-plugin" body="their documentation" />

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Here's an example of a simple Vite plugin very similar to one in <BlankLink href="https://vitejs.dev/guide/api-plugin" body="their documentation" />
```
"very" repeated twice makes the sentence a bit repetitive

    <Code lang="ts" code={`

export const simpleTransform = {
	// name is used during debug
	name: 'simple-transform',
	transform(src, fileName){
		// we only handle our custom file extension
		if(fileName.endsWith('.myext')){
			return {
				// we transform the text in our file
				// to JS
				code: myExtToJs(src),

> 				// if possible return a sourcemap to allow for better debugging

Reviewer: ```suggestion
				// if possible, return a sourcemap to allow for better debugging
```

				map: null,
			}
		}
	}
};
`}/>

In this case we were handling our own custom file extension and compile that to JS but you can also
use the transform hook to change your JS.

    <Code lang="ts" code={`

export const simpleTransform = {
	// name is used during debug
	name: 'remove-console-logs',
	transform(src){
		return {
			code: src.replaceAll(/console.log\(.+?\)/g, ""),
			map: null,
		}
	}
};
`}/>

This super simple plugin eliminate every instance of `console.log()` from your code.

<Aside type="caution">

> 	Don't use this anywhere it's just a silly example and you should probably be a bit more nuanced

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	Don't use this anywhere. It's just a silly example and you should probably be a bit more nuanced
```

	than `replaceAll` if you want to remove logs from your code.
</Aside>

The gist of it is: you can do a lot of cool things with a Vite plugin and we decided to build the
Async Transform to make your life (hopefully) easier!

</details>

## How the `Async Transform` changes my code?

> The reason why we are writing this explainer is because we firmly believe that if you allow you code

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The reason why we are writing this explainer is because we firmly believe that if you allow your code
```

> to be changes by some script you should fully understand how it changes it and what the final result

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to be changed by some script you should fully understand how it changes it and what the final result
```

will look like.

> As shown in our [Mid run cancellation](/explainers/mid-run-cancellation) explainer this Vite plugin

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As shown in our [Mid run cancellation](/explainers/mid-run-cancellation) explainer, this Vite plugin
```

> aim to solve a couple of problems with async code in Typescript:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
aims to solve a couple of problems with async code in Typescript:
```

- Promises are non cancellable: once you start them there's no way to stop the code in the middle of

>   the function from executing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  the function from executing.
```

- Generators can be "stopped" mid execution but Typescript doesn't play very well with the `yield`

>   keyword

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  keyword.
```

> To fix this problems we let you write the simple and familiar async code and we provide a Vite

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To fix these problems, we let you write the simple and familiar async code, and we provide a Vite
```

plugin to transform your async functions into generators!

<Tabs>

<TabItem label="Before">

```svelte
<script lang="ts">
	import { task } from '@sheepdog/svelte';

	const myTask = task(async () => {
		const result = await fetch('/api/my-endpoint');
		return await result.json();
	});
</script>

<button
	on:click={() => {
		myTask.perform();
	}}
>
	perform
</button>
```

</TabItem>

<TabItem label="After">

```svelte
<script lang="ts">
	import { task } from '@sheepdog/svelte';

	const myTask = task(async function* () {
		const result = yield fetch('/api/my-endpoint');
		return yield result.json();
	});
</script>

<button
	on:click={() => {
		myTask.perform();
	}}
>
	perform
</button>
```

</TabItem>

</Tabs>

> As you can see we aim to touch your code the bare minimum. But I can still see the worry on your

Reviewer: The "narrator" has always been an abstract "we" from the beginning, so I would avoid switching suddenly to "I"

```suggestion
As you can see we aim to touch your code the bare minimum. But we can still see the worry on your
```

> face so let's dive a bit more and let's make a couple of clarifications

Reviewer: ```suggestion
face, so let's dive a bit more and let's make a couple of clarifications.
```

### What about my other async functions?

> You don't want to see all of your beloved async functions be turned into generators right? Well,
> worry not because we specifically target only the async functions that are arguments of our own

Reviewer: That's personal feeling but this phrasing sounds slightly too familiar for me compared to the rest of the doc.

```suggestion
If you don't want to see all of your beloved async functions be turned into generators, worry not, because we specifically target only the async functions that are arguments of our own
```

`task` or `task.modifier` functions. And we were really careful with this so even if you have other

> functions that are named task or if you rename your import everything outside the argument of that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
functions that are named `task` or if you rename your import, everything outside the argument of that
```
